# RMICS CODING CENTER: RAPID MARITAL INTERACTION CODING SYSTEM

https://dental.nyu.edu/faculty/cariology-comprehensive-care/ftrg/what-we-do.html

The Rapid Marital Interaction Coding System (RMICS; Heyman, 2004) is an event-based system designed to measure frequencies of behavior 
and behavioral patterns (i.e., sequences) between intimate partners during conflicts. It is adapted from the Marital Interaction Coding
System (MICS), the oldest and most widely used couples observational system (Heyman, 2001) until it was phased out in the late 1990s. 
We built on the established MICS literature and used both empirical and theoretical guidance to create a system (e.g., Heyman, 2001) that 
would be more reliable and valid despite being faster and easier to train and code. The RMICS has been used in approximately 40 separate 
investigations with a range of ages (primarily adult married couples, but also preteen siblings, high school dating couples, and engaged 
couples), populations (e.g., general couples population, couples therapy clients, cancer patients and their partners, families at risk for
adolescent drug abuse, Vietnam veterans, friendship pairs), and research purposes.

In creating the RMICS, we first used a factor analysis of all 1,088 couples coded with the MICS over a 5 year period 
(Heyman, Eddy, Weiss & Vivian, 1995), which indicated that the original 37 microbehavioral MICS codes could be condensed into four 
"categories" - hostility, constructive problem discussion, humor, and responsibility discussion. The first three factors were used to 
create codes. The fourth, responsibility discussion, was incorporated into the broader notion of attributions. We used Holtzworth-Munroe 
and Jacobson's (1988) distillation of attributions into distress-maintaining and relationship-enhancing attribution codes. Further, 
we added several codes to make the system exhaustive and content valid. We also included two codes added to the original MICS after the 
factor analysis was conducted - withdrawal and dysphoric affect (Heyman, Weiss, & Eddy, 1995). Two positive codes (self-disclosure and 
acceptance) were also incorporated from a similar partner coding system, the Kategoriensystem fir partnerschaftliche interaktion 
(KPI; Hahlweg, Reisner, Kohli, Vollmer, Schindler, & Revenstorf, 1984). A highly negative code, psychological abuse, was added later.

In declining hierarchical importance, the RMICS comprises psychological abuse, distress-maintaining attributions 
(negative causal explanations); hostility (e.g., angry affect, criticism, combativeness); dysphoric affect (e.g., sad affect); 
withdrawal (e.g., stonewalling); relationship-enhancing attributions (positive causal explanations); acceptance (e.g., paraphrasing, 
expressions of caring); self-disclosure ("I" statements that express speaker's feelings, wishes or beliefs; acceptance of responsibility); 
humor (e.g., joking, laughing); constructive problem discussion (e.g., description of the problem, constructive solutions, questions and 
agreement); other (statements on something other than a personal or relationship topic; e.g., "Is that the camera?").

The RMICS defines the speaker turn as its basic coding unit. The codes are ordered hierarchically, based on both communication theory 
and substantial research that demonstrates that negative, followed by positive, followed by neutral codes are of decreasing importance 
in understanding partner conflict (see Weiss & Heyman, 1997). If someone emits more than one code during a speaker turn, s/he receives 
the code highest on the hierarchy. To deal with monologues, speaker turns that last more than 30 seconds are interval coded in 30-second 
segments (i.e., coded as if a new speaker turn occurs every 30 seconds).
